Adapt tracing documentation (#24793)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/guides/tracing/index.rst

********

The tracing feature provides hooks that permits you to collect data from
your application and allows tools running on a host to visualize the inner-working of
the kernel and various subsystems.

Every system has application-specific events to trace out.  Historically,
that has implied:

1. Determining the application-specific payload,
2. Choosing suitable serialization-format,
3. Writing the on-target serialization code,
4. Deciding on and writing the I/O transport mechanics,
5. Writing the PC-side deserializer/parser,
6. Writing custom ad-hoc tools for filtering and presentation.

> An application can use one of the existing formats or define a custom format by overloading the

Reviewer: overriding?

internally and statically at compile-time in the bottom-layer.

The CTF top layer is enabled using the configuration option
:option:`CONFIG_TRACING_CTF` and can be used with the different transport
backends both in synchronous and asynchronous modes.

SEGGER SystemView Support
=========================

Zephyr provides built-in support for `SEGGER SystemView`_ that can be enabled in
any application for platforms that have the required hardware support.

The payload and format used with SystemView is custom to the application and

> relies on transport using RTT. Newer versions of SystemView support other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
relies on RTT as a transport. Newer versions of SystemView support other
```

> transports, for example over UART or using Snapshot mode (Both still not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transports, for example UART or using snapshot mode (both still not
```

supported in Zephyr).

To enable tracing support with `SEGGER SystemView`_ add the configuration option
:option:`CONFIG_SEGGER_SYSTEMVIEW` to your project configuration file and set
it to *y*. For example, this can be added to the
:ref:`synchronization_sample` to visualize fast switching between threads::

    CONFIG_STDOUT_CONSOLE=y
    # enable to use thread names
    CONFIG_THREAD_NAME=y
    CONFIG_SEGGER_SYSTEMVIEW=y
    CONFIG_USE_SEGGER_RTT=y
    CONFIG_TRACING=y

.. figure:: segger_systemview.png
    :align: center
    :alt: SEGGER SystemView
    :figclass: align-center
    :width: 80%

.. _SEGGER SystemView: https://www.segger.com/products/development-tools/systemview/

CPU Stats
=========

A special tracing format which provides information about percentage of CPU
usage based on tracing hooks for threads switching in and out, interrupts enters
and exits (only distinguishes between idle thread, non idle thread and scheduler).

Enable this format with the :option:`CONFIG_TRACING_CPU_STATS` option.

Transport Backends
******************

The following backends are currently supported:

* UART
* USB
* File (Using native posix port)

> * RTT (With SystemView)

Reviewer: Is RTT supported for non-SV tracing?

Author: should be, did not try this though.

Using Tracing
*************

> The sample :zephyr_file:`tests/subsys/tracing` demonstrates tracing with

Reviewer: Should this say test instead of sample? Otherwise people will be confused

    :align: center
    :alt: SEGGER SystemView
    :figclass: align-center
    :width: 80%

.. _SEGGER SystemView: https://www.segger.com/products/development-tools/systemview/

CPU Stats
=========

A special tracing format which provides information about percentage of CPU
usage based on tracing hooks for threads switching in and out, interrupts enters
and exits (only distinguishes between idle thread, non idle thread and scheduler).

Enable this format with the :option:`CONFIG_TRACING_CPU_STATS` option.

Transport Backends
******************

The following backends are currently supported:

* UART
* USB
* File (Using native posix port)
* RTT (With SystemView)

Using Tracing
*************

The sample :zephyr_file:`samples/subsys/tracing` demonstrates tracing with
different formats and backends.

To get started, the simplest way is to use the CTF format with the ``native_posix``
port, build the sample as follows:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :tool: all
   :app: samples/subsys/tracing
   :board: native_posix
   :gen-args: -DCONF_FILE=prj_native_posix_ctf.conf
   :goals: build

You can then run the resulting binary with the option ``-trace-file`` to generate

> the tracing data::

Reviewer 2: We could also clarify to "specify the output file path in the newly created ``data`` directory above"

    mkdir data
    cp $ZEPHYR_BASE/subsys/tracing/ctf/tsdl/metadata data/
    ./build/zephyr/zephyr.exe -trace-file=data/channel0_0

The resulting CTF output can be visualized using babeltrace or TraceCompass

> resulting CTF output can be visualized using babeltrace or TraceCompass by

Reviewer 2: Please remove the duplicate statement
